--RUNNING THE PROGRAM--

If you don't plan on changing the samples (or any other aspect of the program), this is the only section you need to read.

Open the 'Tethys-main' folder, then navigate to the 'Calypso' folder and copy its full path. Move to this path in the command line window ('chdir <path>' in Command Prompt, 'cd <path>' in the terminal), then perform one of the two different steps:
 -Open the 'run_with_****' file corresponding to your preferred emulator and current operating system ('*.bat' for Windows, '*.sh' for Linux) in a text editor, then change any included variables like 'EMULATOR_DIR' or 'EXECUTABLE_PATH' to the directories and/or locations of your emulator. Once you're finished, return to the command line window and run that .bat or .sh file.
 -Add the folder containing your desired emulator to your computer's PATH, then return to the command line and run the executable file for the emulator with the 'game.cue' file (typically in the format '<emulator> game.cue'.

By default, emulators will run Calypso using an emulated Saturn controller, which severely limits the program's capabilities. For the full Calypso experience, the controller in the first port should be swapped out for a keyboard. In mednafen, this can be done by creating a text file in the 'mednafen' folder's 'pgconfig' folder called 'game.ss.cfg' with the line 'ss.input.port1 keyboard' (change 'keyboard' to 'gamepad' if you ever want to use the gamepad again), while most other emulators will have a GUI to handle the input change. While using a keyboard in Mednafen, make sure to press 'Ctrl + Shift + Menu' while starting the program to enable input grabbing, then use the same input when you're finished to relinquish the emulator's control.

--SAVING AND LOADING IN THE PROGRAM--

If you've discovered a particular sound you want to keep for later, Calypso allows you to save the current state of the program and reload it (check the included 'SAVING AND LOADING' section of the 'HOW TO USE THIS' text file for more information on this). Due to the large size of these save files, however, you can only save to an external memory device like the Saturn Backup Memory and the Saturn Floppy Drive, not the Saturn's internal system memory. Most emulators will automatically use a virtual Backup Memory when running games, but you may need to explicitly define it if you find yourself running into saving errors - in mednafen, you can specify the device to use by opening the same 'game.ss.cfg' file you made to add keyboard support and adding the line 'ss.cart backup' to it.

For the time being, Calypso can only create a single save file on a given backup device, which is overwritten if you attempt to save again. Since most emulators reserve separate backup data files for separate games, you will not be able to access save files created with different versions of Calypso, including versions of your own creation - as such, I recommend making copies of your Calypso folder before making any changes to it (including editing samples) if you plan on keeping any saves you've made.

If a saving or loading operation fails, Calypso may display an error code indicating to the current state of the backup device:
 0: The backup device is free of errors (likely an issue on the program's end)
 1: The backup device is write protected
 2: The backup device is out of memory
 3: The backup device could not find the file in question
 4: The backup device could not match the file in question
 5: The backup device is broken
 6: Unknown error

--RECOMPILING THE PROGRAM--

Download the Jo Engine source code (https://www.jo-engine.org/download/ or https://github.com/johannes-fetz/joengine), then move the 'Tethys-main' folder into the main 'joengine-master' folder (the one with 'FAQ.txt' and 'LICENSE'), such that opening 'Tethys-main' takes you to a new folder with the folders 'Calypso' and 'PROJ'. Open 'Calypso', then copy its full path and move to it in the command line window ('chdir <path>' in Command Prompt, 'cd <path>' in the terminal). Run 'compile.bat' (Windows) or 'compile.sh' (Linux) here to build the program, and run clean.bat/.sh beforehand to remove any excess files (this usually isn't a problem, though).

Note that this step only compiles the portion of the program that runs on the main processors of the Saturn. The code that actually controls the sound registers is located in the 'PROJ' folder; repeating the above steps with that folder instead will compile the sound driver and move it into 'Calypso''s data folder. If you do not wish to copy the sound driver automatically after compilation, simply remove the 'COPY' statement from 'compile.bat' in your favorite text editor. These steps are only necessary if you want to change the sound driver, though, as the original, precompiled driver is already included in 'Calypso'.

(Important note: if you plan on editing the code yourself, many values #defined in 'pcmsys.h' have equivalents in the 'main.c' file in 'PROJ'. If these values are not the same (and you don't update 'sdrv.bin' by compiling 'main.c'), your program will not have sound!)



